First draft of QAD blog post (#388)
n0-computer/iroh.computer: src/app/blog/qad/page.mdx

And to be fair, blocking random incoming connections to a home network is a sensible choice.

[NAT]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_address_translation

The simplified theory of how UDP holepunching works is that both endpoints send a packet to each other at the same time.
Both routers see the outgoing datagram first, and when they receive the incoming datagram, it is considered to be same connection and is allowed in.
To achieve this in practice you need two things:

- A means of communicating the coordination.
  Iroh uses the relay server as a network path between the two endpoints for this.
  We explained this in more detail in the [iroh on QUIC Multipath] post.

[iroh on QUIC Multipath]: https://www.iroh.computer/blog/iroh-on-QUIC-multipath

- The address the NAT router is going to be using for the other endpoint.
  Because this is where you have to send your holepunching datagrams to.

The second part is often called "address discovery", and it seems an impossible task.
How are we supposed to predict how a random router on the internet is going to behave?

# NAT Types

NAT routers have existed for a very long time,

> and as the world tried to understand them many words have been wasted classifying and naming them.

Author: s/wasted/spilled/ to make this a bit more reasonable :)

In oder words, the source IP + port the server *observes*,
is the address it sends responses too.
Thus you can build a server that informs a client endpoint about the clients address as observed by the server.
The the client this is the *Reflexive Transport Address*.

If the client is behind a NAT router this will be a different address than the client itself is sending from.
So a client can use this to detect if it is behind a NAT.
A client can go even further and use multiple such servers.
Now it can tell if the NAT router is Destination Endpoint Dependent or Destination Endpoint Independent.

# Session Traversal Utilities for NAT: STUN

Naturally such servers have existed for a while.
As part of all the standardisation around audio-video calls in the form of SIP and WebRTC there was a need for endpoints to learn about their reflexive transport addresses.
For this the STUN spec was created,
initially in [RFC 3489] and several versions later we are now at [RFC 8489] if we didn't miss anything.[^rfc-numbers]

Not going to lie about it: I've never read the full STUN spec.[^spec-reading]
It contains a lot and can do many things.

> And yet, the really useful part is surprisingly small.

Author: I've tried to tone this down a bit.  Hopefully this is a bit less distracting.

import { BlogPostLayout } from '@/components/BlogPostLayout'
import {ThemeImage} from '@/components/ThemeImage'

export const post = {
  draft: false,
  author: 'Floris Bruynooghe',

>   date: '2025-08-26',

Author: ```suggestion
  date: '2025-09-01',
```

import { BlogPostLayout } from '@/components/BlogPostLayout'
import {ThemeImage} from '@/components/ThemeImage'

export const post = {
  draft: false,
  author: 'Floris Bruynooghe',
  date: '2025-08-26',

>   title: 'QUIC Address Discovery',

Reviewer: Let's make this title more fun.
```suggestion
  title: 'Ditching STUN: QUIC Address Discovery',
```

```suggestion
  title: 'Towards standardized QUIC hole punching: QUIC Address Discovery',
```

Author: - Ditching STUN for QUIC Address Discovery
- Moving from STUN to QUIC Address Discovery

I appreciate I'm just making it more descriptive rather than fun.  But that probably makes sense when you think of it showing up on sites like reddit, lobsters, hn, ...

Reviewer: It's already renamed to "Moving from STUN to ..." :)
And I think that name is good fwiw

  description:
    "Moving STUN into QUIC",
}

export const metadata = {
    title: post.title,
    description: post.description,
    openGraph: {
      title: post.title,
      description: post.description,
      images: [{
        url: `/api/og?title=Blog&subtitle=${post.title}`,
        width: 1200,
        height: 630,
        alt: post.title,
        type: 'image/png',
      }],
      type: 'article'
    }
}

export default (props) => <BlogPostLayout article={post} {...props} />

# Holepunching

> As you probably know, iroh is in the business of holepunching and gives you a QUIC connection on top.
> The typical scenario is establishing a direct connection between two devices, like laptops or phones, both on different home networks.
> Home networks tend to have a [NAT] router in front of them,
> and, even when using IPv6, tend to block new incoming connections in the same fashion as a NAT router would.
> And to be fair, blocking random incoming connections to a home network is a sensible choice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you probably know, `iroh` is in the business of holepunching.
The typical scenario is establishing a direct QUIC connection between two devices, like laptops or phones, both on different home networks.
Home networks tend to have a [NAT] router in front of them,
and tend to block new incoming connections even when using IPv6.
To be fair: blocking random incoming connections to a home network is a sensible choice.
```

"`iroh` is in the business of holepunching." Is just too good. I think it should be highlighted on it's own.

Reviewer 2: I haven't done a full sweep of this blog yet, but when we refer to iroh in the blog (not at the start of the sentence), we've been using `iroh`. I don't catch them all, sometimes.

[NAT]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_address_translation

The simplified theory of how UDP holepunching works is that both endpoints send a packet to each other at the same time.
Both routers see the outgoing datagram first, and when they receive the incoming datagram, it is considered to be the same connection and is allowed in.
To achieve this in practice you need two things:

- A means of communicating the coordination.
  Iroh uses the relay server as a network path between the two endpoints for this.
  We explained this in more detail in the [iroh on QUIC Multipath] post.

[iroh on QUIC Multipath]: https://www.iroh.computer/blog/iroh-on-QUIC-multipath

> - The address the NAT router is going to be using for the other endpoint.
>   Because this is where you have to send your holepunching datagrams.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The address the NAT router is going to be using for the other endpoint—this is where you have to send your holepunching datagrams.
```

Reviewer 2: ooo, okay, so no spaces and you use an em-dash. BUT, em-dashes are really only used this way in american english.

For british english, which we usually use, you DO use space, but with an en dash. so this should be 
"endpoint – this is where..."

good catch, thank you!

Author: We use British formatting but American spelling?  Or can I start writing s-es and ou-s :grinning: ?

The second part is often called "address discovery", and it seems an impossible task.
How are we supposed to predict how a random router on the internet is going to behave?

# NAT Types

NAT routers have existed for a very long time,

> and as the world tried to understand them many words have been spilled classifying and naming them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and as the world has tried to understand them many words have been spilled classifying and naming them.
```

this is hilarious

the NAT router creates a mapping and sends the datagram from an external address of its choosing.
Incoming datagrams to this external address are then looked up in the mapping table to deliver back to the original source address of the endpoint.

[^addr]: Technically we are dealing with *socket addresses*, which on IPv4 is indeed an IP address and port,
   but IPv6 adds in a scope and flow label into the socket address.
   These fields have some advanced uses but are often ignored,
   so it is easier to think of an IP & port 2-tuple.
   So naming this *address* is a bit of a handwavy term,
   though sufficient to understand the needed logic.

For a Destination Endpoint Independent mapping the mapping is straightforward:
each unique source address is mapped to one of the available external addresses (an IP address & port combination),
*regardless* of the destination address of the datagram.
That means a single source address can send datagrams to many destinations on the internet,
and they will all share the same external address on the NAT router.

For a Destination Endpoint Dependent mapping there could be several variations.

> However for a home router that typically does only have one external IP address only the external port can change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, a home router typically only has one external IP address, so only the external port can change.
```

So the NAT router can pick a new port for each destination, even if the source address remains the same.

Now think back to holepunching:
you need to know the external address the NAT router will map to,
in order to send the holepunching datagrams to each other at the same time.
With Destination Endpoint *Independent* NAT you can use the information from another connection for this.
Destination Endpoint *Dependent* NAT however makes this much harder.
There are still tricks you can do, but for now iroh does not yet support this.

# Reflexive Transport Address

This brings us to the fancy term "Reflexive Transport Address".
Consider you are a server sitting on the internet and you receive a datagram from an endpoint behind a NAT router.

> The IP header of the received datagram will contain the source IP address,
> while the UDP header will contain the source port number.
> The IP & port the server will see is the external address of the mapping the NAT router makes.
> To send a response the server would send a datagram addressed to this observed source address.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The IP header of the received datagram contains the source IP address,
while the UDP header contains the source port number.
The IP & port combination the server sees is the external address, the mapped address the NAT router made.
To send a response, the server needs to send a datagram addressed to this observed source address.
```

In other words, the source address the server *observes*,
is the address it sends responses to.
Thus you can build a server that informs a client endpoint about the client's address as observed by the server.
To the client this is the *Reflexive Transport Address*.

If the client is behind a NAT router this will be a different address than the client itself is sending from.
So a client can use this to detect if it is behind a NAT.
A client can go even further and use multiple such servers:
now if it receives the same reflexive transport address twice,
it is behind a Destination Endpoint Independent NAT.
If it receives two different reflexive transport addresses,
it is stuck behind a Destination Endpoint Dependent NAT.

# STUN

Naturally such servers have existed for a while.
As part of the standardization around audio-video calls in the form of SIP and WebRTC,
there was a need for endpoints to learn about their reflexive transport addresses.
For this the STUN spec was created,
which by now has evolved into [RFC 8489].

> A sizable tome.

Reviewer 2: 😂

[RFC 8489]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8489

Not going to lie about it: I've never read the full STUN spec.
It contains a lot and can do many things.

> And yet, the part iroh actively used is surprisingly small:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And yet, the part `iroh` actively used is surprisingly small:
```

https://quicwg.org/address-discovery/draft-ietf-quic-address-discovery.html

QUIC Address Discovery, or QAD as we call it, is an extension to the QUIC protocol that gets negotiated during the QUIC handshake.
If negotiated,
the remote side will send you an OBSERVED_ADDRESS frame containing the reflexive transport address it observed for you.

One of the cool things is that this can happen regardless of the application protocol being used,
as it happens entirely in QUIC frames.
So you can still use this connection to carry application data.

Another really nice feature flowing from this is that this isn't a request-response protocol anymore.
QUIC supports connection migration for clients,
e.g. when your NAT router updates the mapping for some reason,
or when you move from a Wifi network to mobile data,
QUIC will detect this and migrate the connection to this new network,
without losing any data or breaking the connection.
And whenever that happens while the QAD extension is negotiated,
a new reflexive transport address is observed and will be sent in a new OBSERVED_ADDRESS frame.
Thus this becomes event-based rather than request-response.

> # QAD in iroh Relay Servers
> 
> Since iroh 0.32 both iroh and the relay servers have supported,
> and used, both QAD as well as STUN.
> Since the 0.90 release we have switched to QAD exclusively.
> 
> The work is not finished yet though.
> iroh still uses a special-purpose QUIC connection for QAD.
> At some point we would like to also support making the normal relay connection over QUIC when possible,
> in addition to the current HTTPS1.1/WebSocket connection.
> This would be one fewer connection to the relay server and truly allow us to benefit from the event-based nature of QAD.
> This is something for after the 1.0 release however.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# QAD in `iroh` Relay Servers

Since `iroh` 0.32, `iroh` and the relay servers have supported,
and used, both QAD as well as STUN.
Since the 0.90 release we have switched to QAD exclusively.

The work is not finished yet though.
Iroh still uses a special-purpose QUIC connection for QAD.
At some point we would like to also support making the normal relay connection over QUIC when possible,
in addition to the current HTTPS1.1/WebSocket connection.
This would be one fewer connection to the relay server and truly allow us to benefit from the event-based nature of QAD.
This is something for after the 1.0 release however.
```
